src/combat/README.md, before:

# Combat System

Event-driven combat system handling player vs NPC battles, damage calculations, turn processing, and death handling.

## Contents

| Path                        | Description                                       |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `combatSystem.ts`           | Core singleton orchestrating all combat           |
| `combat.ts`                 | Individual combat instance between two entities   |
| `combatEntity.interface.ts` | Interface for anything that can fight             |
| `npc.ts`                    | NPC class with stats, AI, and combat capabilities |
| `components/`               | Modular combat subsystems                         |

## How Combat Works

1. **Initiation**: Player uses `attack <target>` command
2. **Combat Created**: `CombatSystem` creates a `Combat` instance
3. **Turn Processing**: Each game tick, combat rounds are processed
4. **Damage Calculation**: Based on attacker/defender stats and equipment
5. **Resolution**: Combat ends when one party dies or flees

## Combat Flow

```
Player: attack goblin
    ↓
CombatSystem.initiateCombat(player, goblin)
    ↓
Combat instance created and tracked
    ↓
GameTimer tick → CombatSystem.processCombatTick()
    ↓
Damage calculated, HP reduced, messages sent
    ↓
If HP <= 0 → PlayerDeathHandler or NPC death
```

## NPC AI

NPCs have different aggression levels:

- **Passive**: Never attacks first
- **Neutral**: Attacks if provoked
- **Aggressive**: Attacks players on sight

## Related

- [src/command/commands/attack.command.ts](../command/commands/attack.command.ts) - Initiates combat
- [src/timer/](../timer/) - Game timer triggers combat ticks
- [src/room/](../room/) - Combat is room-scoped
- [data/npcs.json](../../data/npcs.json) - NPC definitions

Commit message:

feat(abilities): implement spellcasting/skill system with MP
Implements a comprehensive ability system with mana points (MP) that integrates
with existing combat and effects systems. Supports four ability types:

- Standard Abilities: Manual cast with per-round cooldown, MP cost
- Combat Abilities: Replace weapon attacks with spell attacks
- Weapon Proc Abilities: Auto-triggered during weapon attacks
- Item-Use Abilities: Manual use with various cooldown types

New features:
- AbilityManager singleton for ability registration and execution
- MP deduction and cooldown tracking per player
- Combat integration hooks for spell attacks and weapon procs
- New commands: cast, abilities, use
- 10 sample abilities across all types
- 4 sample items with ability support

Files:
- New: src/abilities/ (abilityTypes.ts, abilityManager.ts, index.ts)
- New: src/command/commands/ (cast, abilities, use commands)
- New: data/abilities.json, src/schemas/abilities.schema.json
- Modified: combat system, command registry, items.json

Automated implementation via Problem Solver Agent pipeline.
See PR description for full pipeline documentation.

src/combat/README.md, after:

# Combat System

Event-driven combat system handling player vs NPC battles, damage calculations, turn processing, and death handling.

## Contents

| Path                        | Description                                       |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `combatSystem.ts`           | Core singleton orchestrating all combat           |
| `combat.ts`                 | Individual combat instance between two entities   |
| `combatEntity.interface.ts` | Interface for anything that can fight             |
| `npc.ts`                    | NPC class with stats, AI, and combat capabilities |
| `components/`               | Modular combat subsystems                         |

## How Combat Works

1. **Initiation**: Player uses `attack <target>` command
2. **Combat Created**: `CombatSystem` creates a `Combat` instance
3. **Turn Processing**: Each game tick, combat rounds are processed
4. **Damage Calculation**: Based on attacker/defender stats and equipment
5. **Resolution**: Combat ends when one party dies or flees

## Combat Flow

```
Player: attack goblin
    ↓
CombatSystem.initiateCombat(player, goblin)
    ↓
Combat instance created and tracked
    ↓
GameTimer tick → CombatSystem.processCombatTick()
    ↓
Damage calculated, HP reduced, messages sent
    ↓
If HP <= 0 → PlayerDeathHandler or NPC death
```

## NPC AI

NPCs have different aggression levels:

- **Passive**: Never attacks first
- **Neutral**: Attacks if provoked
- **Aggressive**: Attacks players on sight

## Ability Integration

The combat system integrates with the ability system for:

- **Combat Abilities**: Replace weapon attacks with spell attacks
- **Weapon Procs**: Auto-triggered abilities during weapon hits

See [src/abilities/](../abilities/) for ability system documentation.

## Related

- [src/abilities/](../abilities/) - Ability system with combat integration
- [src/command/commands/attack.command.ts](../command/commands/attack.command.ts) - Initiates combat
- [src/timer/](../timer/) - Game timer triggers combat ticks
- [src/room/](../room/) - Combat is room-scoped
- [data/npcs.json](../../data/npcs.json) - NPC definitions
