README.md, before:

# EllyMUD

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Node.js Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/node-%3E%3D18.0.0-brightgreen)](https://nodejs.org/)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.9-blue)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)

A modern, extensible Multi-User Dungeon (MUD) built with Node.js and TypeScript. EllyMUD brings classic text-based RPG gameplay into the modern era with support for multiple connection protocols, real-time multiplayer interaction, and a comprehensive admin system.

## ✨ Features

### Core Gameplay
- 🎮 **Classic MUD Experience** - Text-based RPG gameplay with rich descriptions
- ⚔️ **Real-Time Combat** - Turn-based combat system with NPCs and PvP support
- 🗺️ **Room-Based Navigation** - Explore interconnected rooms with dynamic events
- 🎒 **Inventory System** - Collect, equip, and manage items
- 📊 **Character Progression** - Level up, gain experience, and improve stats
- 💬 **Multi-User Chat** - Communicate with other players in real-time
- 🎯 **Status Effects** - Buffs, debuffs, and persistent effects

### Technical Features
- 🌐 **Multiple Connection Methods**
  - Telnet (port 8023)
  - WebSocket (port 8080)
  - Built-in web client
- 🔒 **Security-First Design**
  - Password hashing with salt
  - Role-based access control (RBAC)
  - Input validation and sanitization
  - Comprehensive audit logging
- 🏗️ **Modern Architecture**
  - TypeScript for type safety
  - State machine pattern for client interactions
  - Singleton managers for core systems
  - Event-driven combat system
- 🤖 **AI Integration (MCP Server)**
  - Model Context Protocol server on port 3100
  - RESTful API for game data access
  - GitHub Copilot integration
  - Secure API key authentication
- 📝 **Advanced Logging**
  - Per-user activity logs
  - Raw session recordings
  - Daily log rotation
  - Separate error and system logs
- 🎛️ **Admin Interface**
  - Web-based admin panel
  - Interactive server console
  - Live session monitoring
  - User management tools

### Fun Extras
- 🐍 **Snake Game** - Play Snake right in the MUD! (Type `snake`)
- 🎨 **ANSI Color Support** - Rich text formatting
- ⚡ **Movement Delays** - Realistic movement based on character stats
- 🤖 **NPC AI** - Enemies with different aggression levels

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- **Node.js** 18.x or higher
- **npm** 8.x or higher

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud.git
   cd ellymud
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Start the server**
   ```bash
   npm start
   ```

4. **Connect to the game**
   - **Web Browser**: Open `http://localhost:8080`
   - **Telnet**: `telnet localhost 8023`
   - **Your favorite MUD client**: Connect to `localhost:8023`

That's it! On first run, you'll be prompted to create an admin password.

## 📖 Documentation

Comprehensive documentation is available in the [docs/](docs/) directory:

- **[Getting Started Guide](docs/getting-started.md)** - New user onboarding
- **[Commands Reference](docs/commands.md)** - Complete list of all commands
- **[Development Guide](docs/development.md)** - For contributors
- **[Architecture](docs/architecture.md)** - System design and patterns
- **[Deployment Guide](docs/deployment.md)** - Production deployment

## 🎮 Usage

### Starting Options

```bash
# Standard start with console interface
npm start

# Auto-login as admin
npm run start:admin

# Auto-login as specific user
npm start -- --forceSession=username

# Development mode with hot reload
npm run dev
```

### Basic Commands

Once connected, try these commands:

```
look              # Look around
help              # Show all commands
stats             # View your character stats
north / south     # Move between rooms
attack goblin     # Start combat
inventory         # Check your items
say Hello!        # Chat with other players
```

Type `help` in-game for a complete list of commands!

### MCP Server (AI Integration)

EllyMUD includes an integrated Model Context Protocol (MCP) server that provides AI tools (like GitHub Copilot) with access to game data:

- **Automatic Startup**: MCP server starts automatically on port 3100
- **API Key Setup**: On first run, you'll be prompted to generate a secure API key
- **Integration**: Works with GitHub Copilot, Claude, and other MCP-compatible clients

**First Run:**
```
⚠️  EllyMUD MCP Server API key is missing.
Would you like to generate one? (Y/n): [Press Enter]

✅ EllyMUD MCP Server key has been added as an environment variable:
   [your-generated-key]

📋 Copy this key and add it to your MCP client configuration!
```

The API key is saved to your `.env` file and can be used in `.vscode/mcp.json` or other MCP client configurations.

For detailed MCP server usage, see [src/mcp/README.md](src/mcp/README.md).

## 🛠️ Development

### Project Structure

```
ellymud/
├── src/              # TypeScript source code
│   ├── command/     # Command system
│   ├── combat/      # Combat mechanics
│   ├── connection/  # Network layer
│   ├── room/        # Room management
│   ├── state/       # State machine
│   └── user/        # User management
├── data/            # JSON data storage
├── public/          # Web client
├── docs/            # Documentation
└── logs/            # Server logs
```

### Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details on:

- Code of conduct
- Development workflow
- Coding standards
- Pull request process

### Building from Source

```bash
# Build TypeScript
npm run build

# Run the compiled JavaScript
node dist/server.js
```

## 🔒 Security

Security is a priority in EllyMUD. We implement:

- **Password hashing** with bcrypt
- **Role-based access control** (RBAC)
- **Input validation** and sanitization
- **Comprehensive audit logging**
- **Session management**
- **MCP Server API Key** - Secure authentication for AI tool access
  - Auto-generated 256-bit key on first run
  - Stored in `.env` file (never committed to version control)
  - Required for all MCP API requests (except health checks)
  - Server refuses to start MCP without valid API key

Found a security vulnerability? Please see our [Security Policy](SECURITY.md) for responsible disclosure.

## 📊 System Requirements

### Minimum
- 1 CPU core
- 512 MB RAM
- 5 GB disk space
- Node.js 18+

### Recommended
- 2+ CPU cores
- 2 GB RAM
- 20 GB disk space
- Linux OS (Ubuntu 20.04+)

## 🌟 Inspiration

EllyMUD draws inspiration from classic MUDs like [MajorMUD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MajorMUD), bringing nostalgic gameplay mechanics into a modern, extensible codebase.

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🤝 Community

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud/issues)
- **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud/discussions)
- **Contributing**: [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)
- **Code of Conduct**: [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

EllyMUD was developed as an exploration of modern development workflows, particularly the use of AI-assisted development tools. The project demonstrates how traditional game concepts can be reimagined with contemporary technology stacks.

Special thanks to the MUD community for keeping the genre alive and inspiring new generations of developers.

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [Complete Command List](docs/commands.md)
- [Architecture Documentation](docs/architecture.md)
- [Deployment Guide](docs/deployment.md)
- [API Documentation](docs/architecture.md#key-subsystems)

---

**Ready to start your adventure?** Check out the [Getting Started Guide](docs/getting-started.md)!

**Want to contribute?** Read the [Development Guide](docs/development.md)!

**Need help?** Open an [issue](https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud/issues/new/choose)!

Commit message:

feat: add wave social command + agent pipeline improvements
Wave Command:
- Add wave.command.ts for room-scoped social gestures
- Support optional targeting (wave, wave <player>)
- Handle self-wave edge case with humorous response
- Register in commandRegistry, update docs

Agent Ecosystem:
- Refine all agent instructions (.agent.md files)
- Add server testing guidance (autonomous MCP testing)
- Add isolated testing options (--dataDir, --roomsFile)
- Update metrics README/AGENTS documentation

MCP and Virtual Sessions:
- Fix virtual session manager for agent testing
- Improve virtual connection handling
- Fix ESLint error: use imported existsSync instead of require

Safety and Conventions:
- Add CRITICAL warning about safe process termination
- Document port-specific kill commands (never pkill node)
- Add terminal command best practices
- Update .gitignore to exclude pipeline outputs

Documentation:
- Sync all README/AGENTS.md pairs
- Update commands.md with wave command
- Add wave to communication commands table
- Add server stopping instructions to README

Note: Pre-existing ESLint any-type warnings in commandRegistry.ts,
virtual.connection.ts, mcpServer.ts not addressed in this commit.

README.md, after:

# EllyMUD

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Node.js Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/node-%3E%3D18.0.0-brightgreen)](https://nodejs.org/)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.9-blue)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)

A modern, extensible Multi-User Dungeon (MUD) built with Node.js and TypeScript. EllyMUD brings classic text-based RPG gameplay into the modern era with support for multiple connection protocols, real-time multiplayer interaction, and a comprehensive admin system.

## ✨ Features

### Core Gameplay
- 🎮 **Classic MUD Experience** - Text-based RPG gameplay with rich descriptions
- ⚔️ **Real-Time Combat** - Turn-based combat system with NPCs and PvP support
- 🗺️ **Room-Based Navigation** - Explore interconnected rooms with dynamic events
- 🎒 **Inventory System** - Collect, equip, and manage items
- 📊 **Character Progression** - Level up, gain experience, and improve stats
- 💬 **Multi-User Chat** - Communicate with other players in real-time
- 🎯 **Status Effects** - Buffs, debuffs, and persistent effects

### Technical Features
- 🌐 **Multiple Connection Methods**
  - Telnet (port 8023)
  - WebSocket (port 8080)
  - Built-in web client
- 🔒 **Security-First Design**
  - Password hashing with salt
  - Role-based access control (RBAC)
  - Input validation and sanitization
  - Comprehensive audit logging
- 🏗️ **Modern Architecture**
  - TypeScript for type safety
  - State machine pattern for client interactions
  - Singleton managers for core systems
  - Event-driven combat system
- 🤖 **AI Integration (MCP Server)**
  - Model Context Protocol server on port 3100
  - RESTful API for game data access
  - GitHub Copilot integration
  - Secure API key authentication
- 📝 **Advanced Logging**
  - Per-user activity logs
  - Raw session recordings
  - Daily log rotation
  - Separate error and system logs
- 🎛️ **Admin Interface**
  - Web-based admin panel
  - Interactive server console
  - Live session monitoring
  - User management tools

### Fun Extras
- 🐍 **Snake Game** - Play Snake right in the MUD! (Type `snake`)
- 🎨 **ANSI Color Support** - Rich text formatting
- ⚡ **Movement Delays** - Realistic movement based on character stats
- 🤖 **NPC AI** - Enemies with different aggression levels

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- **Node.js** 18.x or higher
- **npm** 8.x or higher

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud.git
   cd ellymud
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Start the server**
   ```bash
   npm start
   ```

4. **Connect to the game**
   - **Web Browser**: Open `http://localhost:8080`
   - **Telnet**: `telnet localhost 8023`
   - **Your favorite MUD client**: Connect to `localhost:8023`

That's it! On first run, you'll be prompted to create an admin password.

## 📖 Documentation

Comprehensive documentation is available in the [docs/](docs/) directory:

- **[Getting Started Guide](docs/getting-started.md)** - New user onboarding
- **[Commands Reference](docs/commands.md)** - Complete list of all commands
- **[Development Guide](docs/development.md)** - For contributors
- **[Architecture](docs/architecture.md)** - System design and patterns
- **[Deployment Guide](docs/deployment.md)** - Production deployment

## 🎮 Usage

### Starting Options

```bash
# Standard start with console interface
npm start

# Auto-login as admin
npm run start:admin

# Auto-login as specific user
npm start -- --forceSession=username

# Development mode with hot reload
npm run dev
```

### Basic Commands

Once connected, try these commands:

```
look              # Look around
help              # Show all commands
stats             # View your character stats
north / south     # Move between rooms
attack goblin     # Start combat
inventory         # Check your items
say Hello!        # Chat with other players
```

Type `help` in-game for a complete list of commands!

### MCP Server (AI Integration)

EllyMUD includes an integrated Model Context Protocol (MCP) server that provides AI tools (like GitHub Copilot) with access to game data:

- **Automatic Startup**: MCP server starts automatically on port 3100
- **API Key Setup**: On first run, you'll be prompted to generate a secure API key
- **Integration**: Works with GitHub Copilot, Claude, and other MCP-compatible clients

**First Run:**
```
⚠️  EllyMUD MCP Server API key is missing.
Would you like to generate one? (Y/n): [Press Enter]

✅ EllyMUD MCP Server key has been added as an environment variable:
   [your-generated-key]

📋 Copy this key and add it to your MCP client configuration!
```

The API key is saved to your `.env` file and can be used in `.vscode/mcp.json` or other MCP client configurations.

For detailed MCP server usage, see [src/mcp/README.md](src/mcp/README.md).

## 🛠️ Development

### Project Structure

```
ellymud/
├── src/              # TypeScript source code
│   ├── command/     # Command system
│   ├── combat/      # Combat mechanics
│   ├── connection/  # Network layer
│   ├── room/        # Room management
│   ├── state/       # State machine
│   └── user/        # User management
├── data/            # JSON data storage
├── public/          # Web client
├── docs/            # Documentation
└── logs/            # Server logs
```

### Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details on:

- Code of conduct
- Development workflow
- Coding standards
- Pull request process

### Building from Source

```bash
# Build TypeScript
npm run build

# Run the compiled JavaScript
node dist/server.js
```

### Stopping the Server

⚠️ **Important**: Never use `pkill node` or `killall node` as this will crash VS Code and other Node.js applications.

```bash
# Safe way to stop EllyMUD servers
lsof -i :8023 -t | xargs kill    # Telnet server
lsof -i :8080 -t | xargs kill    # WebSocket server
lsof -i :3100 -t | xargs kill    # MCP server
```

## 🔒 Security

Security is a priority in EllyMUD. We implement:

- **Password hashing** with bcrypt
- **Role-based access control** (RBAC)
- **Input validation** and sanitization
- **Comprehensive audit logging**
- **Session management**
- **MCP Server API Key** - Secure authentication for AI tool access
  - Auto-generated 256-bit key on first run
  - Stored in `.env` file (never committed to version control)
  - Required for all MCP API requests (except health checks)
  - Server refuses to start MCP without valid API key

Found a security vulnerability? Please see our [Security Policy](SECURITY.md) for responsible disclosure.

## 📊 System Requirements

### Minimum
- 1 CPU core
- 512 MB RAM
- 5 GB disk space
- Node.js 18+

### Recommended
- 2+ CPU cores
- 2 GB RAM
- 20 GB disk space
- Linux OS (Ubuntu 20.04+)

## 🌟 Inspiration

EllyMUD draws inspiration from classic MUDs like [MajorMUD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MajorMUD), bringing nostalgic gameplay mechanics into a modern, extensible codebase.

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🤝 Community

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud/issues)
- **Discussions**: [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud/discussions)
- **Contributing**: [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)
- **Code of Conduct**: [CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

EllyMUD was developed as an exploration of modern development workflows, particularly the use of AI-assisted development tools. The project demonstrates how traditional game concepts can be reimagined with contemporary technology stacks.

Special thanks to the MUD community for keeping the genre alive and inspiring new generations of developers.

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [Complete Command List](docs/commands.md)
- [Architecture Documentation](docs/architecture.md)
- [Deployment Guide](docs/deployment.md)
- [API Documentation](docs/architecture.md#key-subsystems)

---

**Ready to start your adventure?** Check out the [Getting Started Guide](docs/getting-started.md)!

**Want to contribute?** Read the [Development Guide](docs/development.md)!

**Need help?** Open an [issue](https://github.com/ellyseum/ellymud/issues/new/choose)!
